Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. In 1982, Science Fiction lost one of its most brilliant, innovative and original writers, Phillip K. Dick, dead at 53 of a stroke.
Dick left us just as he was finally being discovered by a large number of readers, both science fiction fans and non-fans.
Dick had struggled since the early 1950s to write science fiction, full-time, and he produced an immense number of novels and stories, including the 1963 Hugo Wynning novel, The Man in the High Castle.
However, for a long time, his fans were a relatively small number of loyal followers.
Right. For years, Dick's writing just never really caught on with the majority of science fiction fans. This was especially true in the 50s and early 60s, when fans were more interested in hardware science fiction.
Well, with the social changes of the late 60s and the advent of the new wave, Dick's writing achieved a more deserving status.
We talked with a friend of Dick's, Paul Williams, who was known in science fiction for his perceptive portrait of Dick in an article in Rolling Stone.
Others will remember Williams as a rock journalist and as the founder of Craw Daddy magazine.
Williams met Dick at the 1968 World Science Fiction Convention in Oakland. They became friends immediately.
Williams graciously consented to talking about Dick with us.
During most of his writing career, Dick made very little money. We asked Williams why Dick stuck to writing in the face of poor economic returns.
I think a real commitment, first of all, to the ultimate, I don't know if I want to say seriousness, but that's really a real commitment to what he was creating and what he wanted to say.
I think it's a great story that always, when he's written, it's been because he had to write.
And it was equally true that it became the only way he could make a living.
It's a classic freelance writer situation where even though you're okay if you only get $1,500 for a science fiction novel,
then what you have to do to stay alive is write six of them in a year, which he came pretty close to doing at one point.
But Dick didn't stick strictly to writing science fiction. He wrote mainstream novels as well.
It was not until early in the 1960s that he gave up trying to become a successful mainstream writer.
And even then, he didn't give up. Although it felt like that to him at the time.
He just put it away in the back burner, having tried very, very hard for 10 years.
The first 10 years, which while he had his first 10 or so science fiction novel published,
he wrote a mainstream novel for every science fiction novelist.
So really, he was writing two novels for $1,000 advance, one of which would be published in an A-Double novel
and the other of which would go from publisher to publisher and just be turned down.
And there is still 10 or 11 of those in a published novel.
So there are in existence several manuscripts of mainstream novels written by Dick.
We asked Williams if there is any chance these will ever be published.
I think that it's inevitable. Bill had mixed opinions about their quality and I haven't read most of them.
But it seems clear, although we may be surprised, that there's nothing as polished or as good as Confessions of the Craft Artists,
which I think is actually one of his five or six best books.
But because of the interest in those works, it seems inevitable at this point.
So one way or another, they will most or probably all be published within the next 10 or 20 years.
But probably still by small publishers, not by New York publishers.
More about Philip K. Dick with Paul Williams on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Philip K. Dick,
The late Philip K. Dick published some 35 science fiction novels and a few mainstream ones as well.
Among Dick's well-known science fiction novels are the Hugo Award-winning The Man in the High Castle,
Martian Time Slip, The Three-Stigmata of Palmer Eldridge,
The Androids' Dream of Electric Sheep, and Ubic.
Dick's career abruptly ended after the publication of three novels very different from all the others,
Vallas, The Divine Invasion, and The Transmigration of Timothy Archer.
The last one is not science fiction.
As Paul Williams told us in our last show, Dick wrote a number of mainstream novels which have yet to be published.
Dick's science fiction novels and stories are generally plotted around the characters' perceptions of reality.
We wondered if Dick were categorized as a science fiction writer simply because there was no other convenient pigeonhole in which to place him.
Williams said no.
Well, he was truly a science fiction writer, and I think that the primary meaning of that is that you belong to the club and you learn.
By reading science fiction, he came up writing stories for all the science fiction magazines,
and then he started writing novels for Don Wollheim at A's and was read only by science fiction readers,
and was certainly aware of, as a pan, as a reader, all the science fiction, all the plotting devices,
and the whole concept of the genre, the sense of those about to read science fiction.
And I think that that's what it means to be a science fiction writer in a lot of ways,
is to come up from that world and to stay within that world to whatever degree,
at least with part of your work.
And he definitely did that.
He wasn't necessarily satisfied with that, not easy to understand.
But he did, although he was not a great reader of it after adolescence or whatever,
he really loved science fiction, and the people he wrote for and the people that he communicated with were pretty much in that world.
At least, I think it diversified more in the last ten years, but still I would consider him very squarely a science fiction writer.
Williams also told us how Dick felt about his own work.
He always had a very self-deprecating or humble attitude towards his work,
while at the same time always giving you to know somehow that he really took it as seriously and respected it as much as his most artful fans.
What I'm saying is that he really knew how good it was.
But he was able to be very humble about it.
The apathetic response of publishers to Dick's experimental mainstream efforts bothered him.
What frustrated him, and he was very frustrated by it, was primarily that he didn't have the freedom to write what he called experimental mainstream novels as well.
And of course, it was a tremendous victory for him, finally, possibly, but he was aware of it before he died,
when the Transmigration of Timothy Archer was published in hard cover to the first publisher that he submitted it to after writing the novel and so forth.
Or actually, before writing the novel.
So it was something that he always wanted to do, to write this kind of book.
The ghettoization of him as a science fiction writer kept him from it for a long time.
More with Paul Williams on his friend Philip T. Dick on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Paul Williams, the director of the science fiction radio show,
Today we're going to look at two of science fiction author Philip K. Dick's best novels with the help of Paul Williams, who was a close friend of Dick's.
That's significant because most of Dick's works first appeared in Paperback, 22 novels in fact.
It is for this reason that the newly instituted Philip K. Dick Memorial Award honors the year's most original science fiction paperback.
In which human colonists on Mars routinely use powerful hallucinogens to relieve the dreariness of their plight, hard work and loneliness.
Then the mysterious Palmer Eldritch appears with the new drug so powerful that its hallucinations totally overcome reality.
Many of the passages in the book describe hallucinations and illusions so realistically that the reader might assume Dick had first had experience.
We asked Williams if it is true that Dick had never used hallucinogens before he wrote the three-stigmata of Palmer Eldritch.
We also asked him to comment on the report that in the aftermath of his experiments with psychedelics, Dick was afraid to read the proofs of the three-stigmata of Palmer Eldritch.
Then taking LSD and reading the galleys, that's possibly true except that it was years before he read the galleys and maybe years before he took the trip also.
But he was afraid of it before he read them. He always claimed anyway to be scared to read the galleys when they sent them to him.
And he didn't finally re-read them up again according to what he always claimed until a number of years later.
But I'm sure there's no question that it scared him. It scared him while he wrote it.
At one point he told an interviewer that he wrote it to kind of exercise a terrifying vision of the man with the stigmata that he was seeing in the sky while driving to the shack on the California coast that he was doing his writing in.
And it was very real to him and terrifying while he was writing his songs while reading it. I think by the way that it's a brilliant novel.
The Man in the High Castle
The Man in the High Castle is presently considered to be Dick's major accomplishment. It's an alternate world novel which describes the United States in the aftermath of the Axis powers winning World War II.
A side light is that characters in the book learn that in an alternate world the allies have won. They learn this through the Yi Qing, the Chinese book of changes.
It has been reported that for a period Dick himself consulted the Yi Qing but that he repudiated it. We asked Williams if this is true.
The book, the oracle, essentially told him next stop that it wasn't useful for him to keep asking questions of it. His feeling and what he said was that it was actually trying to steer him.
It's some wrong fashion but I think that that kind of incidental effect of The Man in the High Castle is introducing the Chinese book of changes to so many people who have been introduced into the whole culture. It's very fascinating.
We'll talk about Philip K. Dick's last three novels on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Science Fiction author Philip K. Dick produced a large body of novels and short stories during the nearly 30 years span he wrote.
Most of Dick's novels dealt with perceptions of reality. That is questions such as, what is real? Is that person real or is that a robot? Is this all an illusion?
However, the last four novels Dick produced were quite different from his previous efforts.
A Scanner Darkly came out in 1977. It's Dick's tribute to all his friends who died from the effects of drugs and it's a warning to those contemplating their use.
Dick's last three novels, Vallas, The Divine Invasion and The Transmigration of Timothy Archer, are related thematically. They all have spiritual, mystical, religious overtones.
We wondered if Dick wrote these three novels after undergoing some kind of change of life experience. Here are Paul Williams, Dick's friend for many years, comments.
It's certainly something new. He saw these three books as a kind of a trilogy. Even though they have different settings and subjects, the thematic material is extremely related.
It comes out of his own personal experiences and what sort of mystical experiences in particular and also out of at least six years of really intensive research into theology and philosophy and in many ways the spiritual history of human beings.
At least over the last five thousand years or so, which he just totally immersed himself in, originally on the pretext that he was doing research for Vallas, which ultimately turned out to be true.
But there was a period of about three or four years where he didn't write a novel and we all wondered if he would again. And I'm sure he wondered. So this extraordinary work, particularly the last three books, definitely, as you say, comes from a change of life, though not in the sense of going down to the church and getting religion.
Williams then goes on to tell us about the experience, a revelation which awakened it.
He's been kind of zapped by this pink busting light and nothing was really the same again after that. He spent a couple of hours in a really very subtle kind of other world.
And it was only his sense of the importance of this experience that really gives it its way. In other words, exactly what he went through is the other mind that shrugged off who didn't have his particular powers of perception and interest.
That experience is described in Vallas and in slightly different terms in the profile of Dick and Charles Platt's dream makers. We asked Williams about the objective reality of Dick's experience.
That it was very brilliant and the horse lover fat character in Vallas is as real as a self-portrait as a F.E.P. fine.
So Dick's last three novels definitely departure from his previous work, where the result of Dick's own personal experiences.
On our next show, we'll take another look at this group of novels.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
So stay with us.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Fans of Science Fiction author Philip K. Dick realized that Dick's last three novels, Vallas, The Divine Invasion, and The Transmigration of Timothy Archer represent a significant departure from his earlier work.
As we discussed with Dick's friend Paul Williams on our last show, these novels have a spiritual element which was brought about by a vision Dick experienced in 1975.
Only time will tell, but some feel that these three novels, especially The Transmigration of Timothy Archer, will eclipse the man in the high castle as Dick's most important work.
Vallas' Dick's somewhat autobiographical sketch of horse lover fat, and in it are the details of Dick's life-changing spiritual encounter.
The Divine Invasion, the most overtly science fictional of the three, is a mystical treatment of the salvation of Earth in the approaching Armageddon.
The Transmigration of Timothy Archer is not science fiction. Rather, it's an experimental mainstream novel similar to those Dick tried for years to publish.
It's based quite closely on the life of the late Bishop Pike, whom Dick knew for some years.
Here Paul Williams tells us a bit of what Dick was driving at in his final three novels.
And ultimately, his answers, which in effect are his answers, and in the sense of the combination of his entire work, his answers to tentative or whatever, to all the questions he'd been asking in all his books.
What is reality? What is history? What's really going on? And why?
And what is the real nature of the forces here? And as somebody quoted Einstein as saying, you know, Einstein was asked if he could, uh, reporter asked him,
what would you say if you could answer, if you could have the answer to any question? You know, what question would you ask?
And Einstein immediately answered, is the universe friendly?
And that was certainly a burning question on the mind of Philip K. Dick in every book he ever wrote.
And there's a kind of extraordinary revelation in the last two or three books, in which while still giving that incredibly penetrating, ruthless vision of the way things really are,
and often in, you know, still quite a depressing tone, he nevertheless comes through with a very strong conviction that yes, we are ultimately in the hands of, or at least strongly under the influence of,
a basically friendly creature much greater than us that is on our side in a battle that is far from decided.
We ask Williams as some of Dick's conclusions might have been based on the tenets of any organized religion.
You could make this as similar to the Christian myth or myth of almost any other, you know, great world religion, or as different from it as you wanted to.
You know, you could make a great case that, hey, this man believed, you know, the straight party line, you could make a great case that the heretic whose books should be burned, you know,
by every organized, disorganized religion in the world.
So that there's no easy conclusion as to, because it is so uniquely his vision as to what the meaning of the vision and the information part of his last work is.
But there seems no question that he begins to really make some very strong statements about what he finally thinks is going on.
Philip K. Dick will be sorely missed. He had his ardent fans, and his last three novels will continue to gain him new fans from outside science fiction.
We can always hope they'll go back and read his early works.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.